feat(button): initial design guidance (#3)
vmware-clarity/clarity-guidance: 1003-button-design-guidance.md

---
category: component design guidance
state: draft
created: 2024-10-15
updated: 2024-10-22
---

> # Button Component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Button Design Guidance
```

> The [button](https://clarity.design/documentation/button) component allows users to trigger actions or events with a single click.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [button](https://clarity.design/documentation/button) component enables users to trigger actions or events with a single click. Buttons are essential for enhancing interactivity within applications, providing clear pathways for user actions.
```

## Guidance

> Clarity supports `solid`, `outline` and `flat` buttons. They are provided to give visual distinction between the priority or hierarchy of the buttons in the application.

Reviewer: Please also remove the inline code under the "button types" heading.

### Button Types

- **Must** use solid buttons for the primary action that the application is suggesting that the user take.

> - **Must** use outline buttons to indicate a secondary action that complements a primary action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use outline buttons to represent secondary actions that support a primary action. This helps to establish a clear hierarchy between the actions, ensuring users can easily identify their options.
```

> - **Should** use outline buttons to reduce visual noise when there are many actions of equal importance on the page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use outline buttons to minimize visual clutter when presenting multiple actions of equal importance on the page. This approach helps users focus on the actions without overwhelming them with bold visuals.
```

> - **Should** use flat buttons when a user is expected to take an action within the page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use flat buttons when the user is expected to perform an action within the page, as they provide a subtle visual cue that encourages interaction without dominating the design.
```

> - **Should** use a link (or anchor element) in place of a button to navigate the user to a different page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use a link (or anchor element) instead of a button to navigate the user to a different page, as this distinction helps clarify the action.
```

> - **Should** use a flat button for some tertiary action in the page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use a flat button for tertiary actions on the page to maintain visual hierarchy, ensuring that these actions are clearly distinguished from primary and secondary actions.
```

### Button Placement

> - **Should** be positioned to help increase their visibility. Clarity follows [Z-pattern and F-pattern](https://clarity.design/documentation/button#placement) for button placement. Use Z-pattern within constrained containers such as modals, and use F-pattern within unconstrained content such as a form on the page itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** position buttons to enhance visibility, Clarity follows the [Z-pattern and F-pattern](https://clarity.design/documentation/button#placement) for effective placement. Use the Z-pattern in constrained containers, like modals, and the F-pattern for unconstrained content, such as forms on the main page.
```

### Button Typography

> - The text inside of buttons **must** always be uppercase, to distinguish buttons from the rest of the page content.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** ensure that the text inside buttons is always uppercase to clearly distinguish them from other content on the page. However, it’s important to remain flexible and consider accessibility needs, as some users, particularly those with dyslexia or visual impairments, may find uppercase text more challenging to read.
```

- **Should** not use more than three words inside a button to prevent the button text from wrapping to the next line.

> - **Should** use descriptive language on buttons to help the user understand its intent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use descriptive language on buttons to clearly convey their intent, ensuring users can easily understand the action associated with the button.
```

### Button Size

Clarity offers two button sizes : default and compact

> - **Should** use compact buttons where smaller buttons are needed to de-emphasize calls to action. Specially when multiple actions of equal importance are available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use compact buttons when smaller buttons are needed to de-emphasize calls to action, especially when presenting multiple actions of equal importance. This helps maintain visual hierarchy and ensures that users can easily navigate their options without feeling overwhelmed.
```

### Button with Icons

> - **Must not** use two icons in the same button.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must not** use two icons in the same button, as this can create confusion about the button's purpose and make it harder for users to understand the intended action.
```

> - **Should** include text besides the icons that clearly indicates what the button will do.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** include text alongside the icons to clearly indicate the button's function, as this enhances user understanding and accessibility.
```

- **Should** place icons to the left or right of the button text.

> - **Should** use only an icon with no text, if you have space constraints on the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **May** use only an icon with no text if you have space constraints on the page, but an accessible name *must* be provided and *should* be called out in the design.
```

> - **Should** place icons to the left or right of the button text.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** place icons in buttons according to context: typically to the left of the text for in-context actions, but on the right for actions that lead users away from the current page. Always prioritize descriptive text alongside icons to enhance clarity and ensure a consistent user experience.  
```

> - **May** use only an icon with no text if you have space constraints on the page, but an accessible name _must_ be provided and _should_ be called out in the design.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **may** use only an icon without text if space is limited, but they **must** ensure that an accessible name is provided and highlighted in the design.
```

> - Use icons inside buttons to provide the call to action with a visual indicator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use icons inside buttons to provide a visual indicator for the call to action.
```

### Button with Badges

> - Badges **must** always appear to the right of the text in a left-to-right presentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** ensure that badges within buttons always appear to the right of the text in a left-to-right presentation.
```

> - **Should** use badges inside buttons to indicate a known number of items associated with the action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use badges within buttons to display the number of associated items, providing users with quick and relevant information about the action.
```

### Button Interactions & States

Buttons have built-in loading and disabled states. There are three sub-states within the loading state: loading, error, and success.

> - **Must** use a disabled button when the action is unavailable or if the user task is incomplete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use badges within buttons to display the number of associated items, providing users with quick and relevant information about the action.
```

> - **Should** use a loading state to indicate that the application is working on the corresponding action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use a loading state to show that the application is processing the action, helping users understand that their request is being handled.
```

> - **Should** use an error state to indicate that the action has failed to complete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use an error state to indicate that an action has failed to complete, helping users understand that their request was not successful and may require further action.
```

> - **Should** use a success state to indicate that the action has completed successfully.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use a success state to indicate that the action has completed successfully, providing clear feedback to users that their request was processed as expected.
```

> - All three states (loading, error, and success) **should** prevent further execution of the call to action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** ensure that all three states (loading, error, and success) prevent further execution of the call to action, thereby avoiding confusion and ensuring users are aware that their previous action is still being processed or has already been completed.
```
